The thin film solar cell based on CdTe: toward the industrial production. 

Nicola Romeo 

Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Parma, Campus universitario, Parco Area delle 
Scienze, 43100 Parma, Italy, e-mail: Nicola.Romeo@unipr.it tel: +39 0521905257 


Abstract: The recent progress on developing CdTe/CdS thin film solar cells 
is described with emphasis to a fabrication process aimed at a large scale 
production. A completely dry process in which neither CdCl2 nor etching 
acids, developed in our laboratory, is reported. Small area 1cm2 stable solar 
cells with an efficiency of 15.8% can be obtained with this process. Neither 
copper nor any other element of the first group of the periodic table is used 
in the back contact in order to avoid the degradation, which is known to be 
caused by the diffusion of these elements through the grain boundaries. 

1. Introduction 
Single crystal solar cells, such as Si and/or III-V compound solar cells have showed, in the 
laboratory scale, efficiencies close to their respective theoretical limits. Si modules with an 
efficiency around 15% can be easily bought at an average cost of 5¼:WKDWLVTXLWHIDUIURPEHLQJ 
competitive with the cost of electrical energy obtained from fossil fuels. 

A further cut of Si modules cost could be obtained both by reducing the thickness and 
enlarging the area of Si wafers and by increasing the production by automating the fabrication 
process. However, it will be quite difficult to decrease the price under 2¼:7KHRQO\ZD\WRUHDFK 
a module cost competitive to that of electrical energy obtained from fossil fuels is that of using 
modules based on thin film solar cells. There are at least three reasons why thin film modules could 
be cost competitive: 
a) The amount of source material is at least 100 times less than that used for single crystal modules 

and is a negligible part of the overall cost. 
b) The fabrication process can be completely automated and a production yield of one module per 
minute can be obtained. 
c) Low cost soda lime glass can be used as a substrate 

Production cost of less than 0.5$/W have been foreseen by K.Zweibel [1] for thin film 
modules, a cost that is close to be competitive with the electrical energy obtained from fossil fuels. 
So far, three kinds of thin film solar cells are considered for production: 
1) Amorphous silicon : a-Si maximum efficiency of ~13% [2] 
2) CuInGaSe2/CdS: maximum efficiency of 19.2% [3] 
3) CdTe/CdS: maximum efficiency of 16.5% [4] 

Among these, the CdTe/CdS thin film solar cell is the most favoured since, due to the simple 
techniques used for thin film deposition, it can be more easily brought from laboratory scale to 
industrial scale. 

Nowadays there are two companies producing CdTe/CdS modules namely First Solar in the 
United States and Antec Solar in Germany. 


2. The CdTe/CdS thin film solar cells 
The CdTe/CdS thin film solar cell is composed of four layers, namely the TCO (Transparent 
Conducting Oxide) which acts as the front contact, CdS which is the n-type partner, CdTe which is 
the p-type partner, and the back contact (see Fig.1). Both TCO and back contact are constituted of 
two sub-layers. As a substrate, a soda lime glass is normally used. 


Figure 1: Structure of the CdTe/CdS thin film solar cell 

3. The TCO layer 
The characteristics which a TCO layer must exhibit are: 
1) A low sheet resistance less than 10 Ohm-square in order for it not to add a series resistance to the 
solar cell 
2) A high transparency more than 90% in the wavelength region of interest that is between 400nm 
and 800nm for CdTe/CdS solar cells. 

Indium tin oxide can fulfil these requirements. However, due to the high temperature at which 
CdTe is deposited and/or treated in presence of Cl, some In can diffuse from the ITO into the 
subsequent deposited layers. In order to avoid the In diffusion, a buffer layer such as SnO2 or ZnO 
is interposed between ITO and CdS. 

A buffer layer thickness of 100-200nm can be sufficient to hinder the In-diffusion. 

We demonstrated, by SIMS depth profile measurements, that the In concentration in CdTe 

-3 -3 

decreases from ~1017cmto 5×1015cmwhen the buffer layer is introduced between ITO and 
CdS/CdTe. The buffer layer has another role: due to its relatively high resistivity, in the order of 
102-103 Wcm, it can reduce the shunt that could form between CdS and ITO since CdS has to be 
very thin (~60-80nm). Having in mind an industrial production, both ITO and buffer layer are 
deposited by DC sputtering. ITO is deposited in an atmosphere of Ar+1% of O2 while SnO2 or ZnO 
are deposited by using metal targets in an atmosphere of Ar+20%O2. 

4. The CdS Layer 
CdS films can be prepared by several methods. Among these, Chemical Bath Deposition 
(CBD) and Close-Spaced Sublimation (CSS) demonstrated to be suitable to prepare high efficiency 
cells. However, for an industrial production, sputtering is considered the most suitable technique. 
Simple radio frequency sputtering does not produce CdS films that give high efficiency cells. 
However, high quality CdS films can be obtained by sputtering if some F is introduced in the 


sputtering chamber. We prepared F-doped CdS films by introducing in the sputtering chamber Ar 
containing 3% of trifluoromethane (CHF3). This gas is decomposed in the sputtering discharge and 
fluorine, being negative is directed to the substrate. We expected that fluorine, being a donor for 
CdS, decreased the film resistivity, but this did not happen. On the other hand, CdS films prepared 
in an atmosphere of Ar+CHF3 exhibit a forbidden gap larger than that of CdS films prepared in an 
atmosphere of simple Ar (see Fig.2). 

(a) (b) 
Fig 2: Transparency spectrum of the CdS film prepared by sputtering in: (a) only Ar, (b) in Ar+CHF3 

They exhibit a stronger cathodoluminescence, a stronger photoconductivity and, what is more 
important, they give higher efficiency solar cells. Probably, the effect of fluorine is that, since it 
bombards the CdS film during the growth, it eliminates any excess of Cd and S and produces a 
more stoichiometric film. Besides, some CdF2 could form during the growth that can passivate the 
grain boundaries. We observed that this type of CdS is harder to mix with CdTe when the 
CdS/CdTe structure is treated at 400°C in presence of chlorine. This argument will be afforded 
more in details below. 

5. The CdTe Layer 
CdTe films can be prepared by several methods such as simple evaporation, electrodeposition, 
sputtering and CSS. The choice of the right method has to be made by making the following 
considerations: 
a) For industrial applications the deposition rate should be very high on the order of a few 
mm/min since a minimum thickness of 3-4mm is needed in order to avoid shunts through the grain 
boundaries. In this case electrodeposition and sputtering are excluded. 
b) The crystalline quality of the film, namely the grain size, should be quite high. This can be 
obtained only if high substrate temperature is used. The simple evaporation in high vacuum limits 
the substrate temperature to 300-350°C, since at higher temperatures CdTe tends to re-evaporate. 
The grain size of evaporated CdTe films is always less than 1mm and it is quite difficult to obtain 
CdTe/CdS thin film solar cells with efficiency higher than 12% by depositing CdTe by simple 
evaporation. 


The only method that is able to grow CdTe at high substrate temperature (up to 650°C) and that 
gives CdTe films with a grain size much larger than 1mm is the close-spaced sublimation (CSS) 
Fig.3. Efficiencies up to 16.5% [4] can be obtained if CdTe is deposited by CSS. 


Fig 3: CSS scheme for CdTe deposition 

A peculiar characteristic of CSS is that it permits to deposit films at substrate temperatures 
much larger than that used with other techniques giving the possibility to get more crystallised and 
better quality thin films. The CSS is made up of a crucible containing the material to be evaporated 
and a substrate that is put very close to the crucible (2-8 mm). The evaporation is done in presence 
of an inert or reactive gas whose pressure can be varied between 1 and 100mbar. Since the crucible 
temperature is kept always higher than that of the substrate, material is transferred from the crucible 
to the substrate by sublimation. The presence of a gas inside the CSS chamber can help the 
deposited material not to rievaporate even at temperatures at which the material evaporates when it 
is in a high vacuum chamber. In our case the CSS is made up of two graphite blocks that act 
respectively as crucible and substrate holder and they are put one over each other at a distance of 
4mm. The graphite blocks are heated up by lamps that are kept close to them. The temperature of 
both crucible and substrate is controlled by thermocouples immersed in the graphite blocks. As a 
gas inside the chamber, we used either Ar or O2, or Ar mixed with O2. Depending on substrate 
temperature a CdTe grain size ranging from 1 to 10 mm can be obtained. When O2 is put in the CSS 
chamber, the grain size is always smaller, but we found out that CdTe(O)/CdS solar cells exhibit 
generally a larger VOC and fill factor. We explained this fact considering that CdTe, growing in 
presence of O2, tends to have a larger number of Cd-vacancies, since Cd reacts more than Te with 
O2, and some Cd is lost in form of CdO. More Cd-vacancies means more p-type carriers. 

6. CdTe-treatment in presence of Cl2 
An important step in the fabrication of CdTe/CdS thin film solar cells is the CdTe treatment in 
presence of Cl2. This is generally made by covering the CdTe surface with a layer of CdCl2 that can 
be deposited both by dipping the CdTe film in a solution containing CdCl2 or by evaporating 100200nm 
of CdCl2 on the CdTe surface. After the deposition of CdCl2, the CdTe film is put in an oven 
and it is treated for 20 minutes at 400°C. At this temperature CdCl2 is decomposed and reacts with 
CdTe bringing CdTe small grains in the vapour phase. In this way, CdTe is reordered and most 
defects are removed. If this treatment is not done, the efficiency of CdTe/CdS solar cells is never 
higher than 5%. In view of an industrial production, we invented a completely new way of treating 
CdTe in presence of Cl2 that avoids any use of CdCl2. We treat CdTe in presence of a gas 
containing Cl2 mixed with Ar. This gas could be anyone of the Freon family but we chose the one 
that contains less chlorine such as CHF2Cl (difluorocloromethane) since it is the less dangerous for 
the ozone belt. This gas is inert and not toxic at room temperature and it is contained in low-
pressure cylinders; therefore it can be handled very easily. A mixture of ~100mbar of Ar and 


20mbar of CHF2Cl at 400°C is sufficient to give the same effects as the treatment with the CdCl2. 
Since at 400°C CHF2Cl is decomposed and CdTe starts to decompose, we suppose that the 
following reaction happens: 

CdTe (solid) + 2Cl2 (gas) Þ CdCl2 (gas) + TeCl2 (gas) Þ 2Cl2 (gas) + CdTe (solid) 

In this way, the small CdTe grains go into vapour phase and become solid again only if they 
are more strongly bound and then more ordered. An increase of the average grain size can be seen 
in Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 where the CdTe surface is shown before and after treatment. The use of this new 
method for treating CdTe gives a strong advantage for an industrial production. First of all, the step 
of depositing CdCl2 is eliminated. CdCl2, differently from CdTe, has a high vapour pressure at 
temperature as low as 400-500°C and, in case of fire, Cd can be freed that is very dangerous for the 
human health. 


Fig. 4: AFM image of not treated-CdTe 


Fig 5: AFM image of CHF2Cl treated CdTe 

After the treatment, keeping the sample at 400°C, a vacuum is made in order that any CdCl2 
that could form onto the CdTe surface is removed. In this way, the CdTe surface remains clean and 
it is ready for the back contact. The process here described has been patented. 


7. The back contact 
Making an ohmic contact to CdTe is a quite difficult task. Most researchers deposit a few 
nanometers of Cu on top of CdTe in order to strongly dope p-type the CdTe surface. Before 
depositing Cu, an etching in Br-methanol or in a mixture of HNO3 and HPO3 is done in order to 
make the CdTe surface rich in Te. In this way a Cu2Te thin film is formed which could limit the Cudiffusion 
into CdTe. The contact is then completed with graphite past. This type of contact works 
quite well but it introduces another drawback that is Cu, being a very fast diffuser in CdTe, migrates 
through the grain boundaries reaching the junction where it can create shunting paths. If the solar 
cell has to live almost 20 years, Cu has to be avoided. 

We invented a new back contact, which does not contain copper or any element of the 1st group 
of the periodic table. Our contact is made by sputter depositing 200nm of Sb2Te3 onto the CdTe 
surface at a substrate temperature of ~300°C. Sb2Te3 has a forbidden gap of ~0.3eV, is p-type and 
exhibits a resistivity of less than 10-3W×cm. We made this choice since Sb2Te3 contains Sb, a group 
V element, which, if it dopes CdTe close to the surface, it dopes p-type. This type of contact 
resulted to be very stable even if the solar cell is exposed to a 20 suns light soaking at a temperature 
of 100°C or more. Instead, an improvement of the solar cell parameters has been seen after light 
soaking. The contact in completed by depositing 200nm of Mo on top of Sb2Te3. 

One important consideration to be made is that we do not etch CdTe before making the contact 
since we do not need to create a Te-rich surface on top of CdTe. The ohmicity of Sb2Te3 has been 
also verified by using it as a contact for CdTe single crystal [5]. 

8. The CdTe/CdS solar cell 
The parameters of the CdTe/CdS solar cells prepared by the process described before have 
been determined by measuring the I-V characteristic under an AM1.5, 100mW/cm2 simulated solar 
light.Open circuit voltages ranging between 840 and 870mV, short circuit currents between 24 and 
26 mA/cm2 and fill factors between 0.6 and 0.72 are obtained. 

The highest efficiency that we were able to obtain on an area of 1cm2 is 15.8%. The I-V 
characteristic of this cell is shown in Fig.6. Cell parameters are: VOC=0.862mV, JSC=25.5mA/cm2, 
ff=72% and h=15.8%. 


Fig6: I-V characteristic of our best completely dry-processed cell. 


9. A possible industrial in-line dry process 
The techniques that we use in our process are sputtering and CSS both fast and easily scalable. 
A possible industrial dry process is shown in Fig.7. Modules of 0.6´1.2m2 can be processed in a 
few minutes. 

The glass, moved on a rail, enters in a washing and drying machine after which it is heated up 
to 400°C and goes into a sputtering chamber, where 500nm of TCO are deposited. The temperature 
is decreased again to RT and a laser scribing is done in order to eliminate the TCO along parallel 
lines 1cm distant one from each other. The temperature is then risen on to 250°C and 60-80nm of 
CdS are deposited by sputtering. In sequence the substrate temperature is risen up to 500°C and 
5000-6000 nm of CdTe are deposited by CSS. After decreasing the temperature to RT a second 
laser scribing is done in order to remove CdS and CdTe in parallel lines close to the ones made 
before. 

Washingand 
dryingmachineTCO Sputt.
CdTe withO2CSS1stLaserScribingSputt-CdSwithCHF3TreatmentwithCHF2Cl3rdLaser 
ScribingSb2Te3& MoSputt. 
2ndLaser 
ScribingGlassWashingand 
dryingmachineTCO Sputt.
CdTe withO2CSS1stLaserScribingSputt-CdSwithCHF3TreatmentwithCHF2Cl3rdLaser 
ScribingSb2Te3& MoSputt. 
2ndLaser 
ScribingGlassWashingand 
dryingmachineTCO Sputt.
CdTe withO2CSS1stLaserScribingSputt-CdSwithCHF3TreatmentwithCHF2Cl3rdLaser 
ScribingSb2Te3& MoSputt. 
2ndLaser 
ScribingWashing and 
drying machine 
TCO Sputt. 
CdTe with O2 
CSS 
1st Laser 
Scribing 
Sputt-CdS 
with CHF3 
Treatment 
with CHF2Cl 
3rd Laser 
Scribing 
Sb2Te3 & Mo 
Sputt. 
2nd Laser 
Scribing 
GlassGlass 
CdTe400°C500°C250°CRTRT300°C400°CRTRTTCOLaser 
scribingCdSTreatmentLaser 
scribingLaser 
scribingCdTe400°C500°C250°CRTRT300°C400°CRTRTTCOLaser 
scribingCdSTreatmentLaser 
scribingLaser 
scribingCdTe400°C 
500°C 
250°C 
RTRT 
300°C 
400°C 
RT RT 
TCO 
Laser 
scribing 
CdS 
Treatment 
Laser 
scribing 
Laser 
scribing 
Fig 7: Block diagram and temperature profile of the industrial in-line dry process 


Fig 8: Typical interconnects scheme for a CdTe/CdS solar cell module 

The temperature is risen again to 300°C at which 300nm of Sb2Te3 and 300nm of Mo are 
deposited in sequence by sputtering. Finally, a third laser scribing is done in parallel lines close to 


those made by the second laser scribing in order to have a module made up of solar cells 1cm large 
and as long as the length of the glass all put in series. (see Fig. 8). 

This process is the simplest process to fabricate CdTe/CdS photovoltaic modules since 
differently from Antec or First Solar it does not use CdCl2 to treat nor acids to etch the CdTe 
surface. 

10. Environment issues 
Since CdTe contains Cd, a tale wanders around that CdTe-based photovoltaic modules could 
be dangerous. As sodium chlorine (kitchen salt) is not sodium, CdTe is not Cd. The melting point of 
CdTe is 1041°C and it starts to evaporate at 1050°C at atmosphere pressure. In case of fire, the 
covering glass melts and encapsulated everything. This experiment was already done. 

Cd is a by-product of Zn, Pb and Cu mining. Most of Cd, since it is not used in the market, is 
buried or stored for future use or disposed of in landfills as hazardous waste. 

The Cd world consumption is on the order of 20000 tons per year while for 1000MW of power 
generated from 10% efficient CdTe modules only 700 tons of Cd are needed (only 4% of total 
consumption of Cd. 

Paradoxically, using Cd to form CdTe and then to make photovoltaic modules removes Cd 
from the environment and reduces the risk of pollution [6, 7]. 

11. Conclusion 
The technology to fabricate CdTe/CdS thin film solar cells can be considered mature for a 
large scale production of CdTe-based modules. A stable efficiency of 15.8%has been demonstrated 
for 1 cm2 laboratory cell and it is expected that an efficiency of 12% can be obtained for 0.6´1.2m2 
modules. A fully automated in-line process could produce 1 module every 2 minutes at a cost 
substantially less than 1¼: 

We have contributed to strongly simplify the process: 

1. By developing a new way of depositing CdS, namely sputtering in presence of CHF3 
2. By using a gas such as CHF2Cl instead of CdCl2 for treating CdTe 
3. By eliminating the CdTe etching step from the production process 
4. By inventing a new ohmic and stable contact for CdTe 
References 

[1] K. Zweibel, “Thin films: past, present and future”, Progress in Photovoltaic, Vol.3, N°5 
(1995) 
[2] J. Yang, A. Banerjee, S. Guha, “Amorphous and nanocrystalline silicon-based multi-
junction solar cells”, Appl. Phys. Lett. 70 (1997) 2975. 
[3] K. Ramanathan, M.A. Contreras, C.L. Perkins, S. Asher, F.S. Hasoon, J. Keane, D. Young, 
M. Romero, W. Metzger, R. Noufi, J. Ward and A. Duda, “Properties of 19.2% efficiency 
ZnO/CdS/CuInGaSe2 thin-film solar cells”, Prog. Photovolt: Res. Appl. 11 (2003) 225–230 
[4] X. Wu, “High-efficiency polycrystalline CdTe thin-film solar cells”, Solar Energy 77 (2004) 
803–814 
[5] A. Zappettini, F. Bissoli, E. Gombia, A. Bosio, N. Romeo, “Characterisation of Sb2Te3 
ohmic contacts on p-type CdTe single Crystal”, IEEE Transactions Nuclear Science 
[6] E. Alsema et al., Report n°96074, Utrecht University, 1996 
[7] K. Zweibel, V. Fthenakis, NCPV Program Review Meeting (2003), 
http://www.nrel.gov/cdte/ 

